---
title: About me
author: Rikki-Lea James
email: rikki@heirloom-earth.com
category: sustainable living
tags: [aboutme, systemsthinking, communities, resilience, sustainableurbandesign]
permalink: about-me
created: 2016-04-16T18:00:00+10:00
edited:
---

Considering this is my first ever blog post, I thought I’d introduce myself a little bit.

My name is Rikki-Lea, I live in Brisbane and absolutely love the sub-tropical environment here. I have a passion for all things sustainable; I’m a little bit obsessed with farmers markets, bushwalking, and sustainable local environments and communities.

Having recently finished my studies for a Bachelor of Sustainability, living an environmentally and socially sustainable lifestyle is one of my main goals. Although I know quite a bit about sustainability, I would have to say that I am still a little way off living the ‘sustainability dream’. I sometimes shower for longer than I should, and will occasionally buy an imported wine – but I’m working on it!

 I know that everyone’s journey to sustainability is made up of many, many small steps and that sharing information with others is the best way to learn, so I’m looking forward to hearing all your tips and tricks for sustainable living, as well as sharing a little of my own knowledge.

# A few of my passions...

## Systems thinking

A concept I came across at uni, I truly believe that sustainability and systems thinking go hand in hand. In fact, true sustainability is very hard to achieve without properly understanding the complex ecological system we are a part of. Every resource we consume from the food we eat to the shelter we build is at very least derived from natural resources that can only be provided by a healthy functioning ecosystem. That chocolate bar I ate five minutes ago required water to grow the cocoa and coconuts, it required energy to extract the coconut milk. It required wood from trees to package it and fuel to transport it to the local health food shop. It’s clear to see that we not only impact upon our environment, it sustains us and we are very much a part of nature rather than separate from it! Additionally, there are social and economic impacts of the chocolate bar I mentioned before, such as fair pay for the cocoa farmer and ensuring that she or he isn’t over worked. Taking the time to consider the impacts of our actions on the complex system that is Earth is so important.

## Communities and resilience

I love local communities. Each is so incredibly unique, made up of a diverse range of people with a special selection of skills and knowledge that sets them apart. Creating resilient communities involves nurturing local enterprise, encouraging a diverse range of activities and production within our local area, and making sure that our villages, towns and cities are able to bounce back in times of crisis. Not only does this include ensuring our local ecosystems are healthy, that we produce a variety of different and localised foods, but also that the ties amongst and with one another are strong. Getting out and about, meeting others and networking are all indications of resilience.

## Sustainable architecture and urban design

I could talk for hours about sustainable cities and buildings! Considering so many of us now live in cities creating sustainable, comfortable and nurturing places to live is so important. Solar passive design, sustainable building materials, solar photo-voltaics, rainwater tanks, water sensitive landscaping, active transport, walkable cities, are all ways of achieving this.

## Food miles

This is where I feel I have made the most progress on my sustainability journey so far. Learning that a significant proportion of my carbon footprint was devoted to the food I consume was a bit of a shock to me. Not only does part of this include the land clearing required to produce it and the energy required in the form of fertilisers to grow it, but it also involves the transportation of the product to my doorstep. Food from the average supermarket may first travel from farm to ship, then across the globe to the next port, then in a refrigerated truck to the supermarket, then from the supermarket to my plate. That is a long journey for something as simple as an apple! So this is why I love local farmers markets. I get to meet the producer (and make some new friends in the process), ensure that the food was grown organically or bio-dynamically to eliminate the need for energy intensive fertilisers, and go home with a product that is incredibly fresh and tasty. Win, win, win!

## Gardening and permaculture

Having a (very small) productive garden has already changed my life. I love the moments of serenity I experience whilst watering my produce and the satisfaction of knowing that I have grown some of what goes onto my plate. Nothing beats the feeling of plants starting to flower, or finding a ladybird in amongst your marigolds.

## Hiking and kayaking

I love hiking and kayaking, because they are my ways of reconnecting with nature. Reconnecting with nature is so important for our mental and physical health. On our adventures locally, my partner and I have seen koalas relaxing in suburban parks, green turtles popping their heads out of the water for air, and eagles soaring over local creeks. We also do venture out further afield into the Sunshine Coast and Gold Coast Hinterlands, enjoying remnant rainforests and the absolute peace of the Australian bush. If you can recommend a great bush walk, let me know!

## So many others!

You’ll also see me write about a variety of other topics I love including: marine sustainability, urban sustainability, nature photography, sustainable tourism, food, waste reduction, overconsumption and how to tackle it, and much more. But there is just too much to list here, so let’s just say that this blog is about working towards living sustainably in the subtropics and sharing knowledge about sustainable lifestyles.

Looking forward to meeting you all!